# How to secure your digital data properly
_by Diederik de Haas_

## Part 1: Passwords and passphrases
Passwords and passphrases are essentially the same. Usually the distinction is between using 1 word and multiple words respectively. In this document I will use the term _password_ since it's more commonly known/used word.  
Most people have a severe dislike when it comes to passwords and that's quite understandable. When you want to interact with a site you usually have to register by choosing a username and password. And your password usually has to be of a minimum (and maximum) length, it has to contain both lowercase and uppercase letters and often also a number and a special character. That would be fine and doable if you only have to do it once, but it becomes really annoying and hard when you have to do it tens or hundreds of times. And having to change your password on a regular basis only adds to the problem/annoyance.  

As a result a lot of people resort to using the same username and password over and over again. And quite often the passwords people choose are '123456' or the name of their loved ones/children/pets/etc and/or dates meaningful to those loved ones/children/pets/etc. Those passwords are easily guessed by people who know a thing or two about you. And with the wealth of information people share online, it's often not so hard to guess those by people who don't know you (personally). 
Besides making educated guesses about someone's passwords, there's another way for people to get your password and that's called a _brute force attack_.

A brute force attack is simple 'endless' trying to guess someones password until you get it right. While it would be a tedious and time consuming process to do manually, computers are quite good at it. With a resonably fast computer you can make millions of guesses **a second**. And when you add (multiple) powerful graphics cards into that mix, that goes up to [billions of guesses a second](http://arstechnica.com/security/2012/08/passwords-under-assault/). What's more, there are (long) list of passwords circulating on the internet with common used passwords which can be (and are) used to narrow down the list of passwords to try. There are also programs which can add intelligence to narrow that list down even further. While substituting an 'a' with an '@' or 'e' with '3' does make your password a bit more secure, it's actually negligible. The reason for that is that it is rather commonly known and moreover people are actually more predictable than we'd like to think. 

While most people probably [think that 'qeadzcwrsfxv1331' would be a good password](http://arstechnica.com/security/2013/05/how-crackers-make-minced-meat-out-of-your-passwords/), it's actually not. Just type it on your keyboard to find out why ;-) The article in the link also shows that some security experts were able to figure out up to 82% of passwords from a list of 16,000 in about an hour, while another one got till 90% in 20 hours.  
Fortunately, a brute force attack isn't able to crack every password. As a (simplistic) rule of thumb, a password of 12 characters or more isn't practically breakable since it would consume too much time. That is because each character increases the number of passwords to try exponentially. 
